ulcers of the throat the patient should gargle frequently with chlorine
water or with perchloride of mercury (1 in 2000); if the ulcer continues
to spread it should be painted with acid nitrate of mercury.

In the treatment of _iritis_ the eyes are shaded from the light and
completely rested, and the pupil is well dilated by atropin to prevent
adhesions. If there is much pain, a blister may be applied to the
temple.

_The Relations of Syphilis to Marriage._--Before the introduction of the
Ehrlich-Hata treatment no patient was allowed to marry until three years
had elapsed after the disappearance of the last manifestation. While
marriage might be entered upon under these conditions without risk of
the husband infecting the wife, the possibility of his conveying the
disease to the offspring cannot be absolutely excluded. It is
recommended, as a precautionary measure, to give a further mercurial
course of two or three months' duration before marriage, and an
intravenous injection of an arsenical preparation.

#Intermediate Stage.#--After the dying away of the secondary
manifestations and before the appearance of tertiary lesions, the
patient may present certain symptoms which Hutchinson called
_reminders_. These usually consist of relapses of certain of the
affections of the skin, mouth, or throat, already described. In the
skin, they may assume the form of peeling patches in the palms, or may
appear as spreading and confluent circles of a scaly papular eruption,
which if neglected may lead to the formation of fissures and superficial
ulcers. Less frequently there is a relapse of the eye affections, or of
paralytic symptoms from disease of the cerebral arteries.

#Tertiary Syphilis.#--While the manifestations of primary and secondary
syphilis are common, those of the tertiary period are by comparison
rare, and are observed chiefly in those who have either neglected
treatment or who have had their powers of resistance lowered by
privation, by alcoholic indulgence, or by tropical disease.

It is to be borne in mind that in a certain proportion of men and in a
larger proportion of women, the patient has no knowledge of having
suffered from syphilis. Certain slight but important signs may give the
clue in a number of cases, such as irregularity of the pupils or failure
to react to light, abnormality of the reflexes, and the discovery of
patches of leucoplakia on the tongue, cheek, or palate.

The _general character of tertiary manifestations_ may be stated as
follows: They attack by preference the tissues derived from the
mesoblastic layer of the embryo--the cellular tissue, bones, muscles,
and viscera. They are often localised to one particular tissue or organ,
such, for example, as the subcutaneous cellular tissue, the bones, or
the liver, and they are rarely symmetrical. They are usually aggressive
and persistent, with little tendency to natural cure, and they may be
dangerous to life, because of the destructive changes produced in such
organs as the brain or the larynx. They are remarkably amenable to
treatment if instituted before the stage which is attended with
destruction of tissue is reached. Early tertiary lesions may be
infective, and the disease may be transmitted by the discharges from
them; but the later the lesions the less is the risk of their containing
an infective virus.

The most prominent feature of tertiary syphilis consists in the
formation of granulation tissue, and this takes place on a scale
considerably larger than that observed in lesions of the secondary
period. The granulation tissue frequently forms a definite swelling or
tumour-like mass (syphiloma), which, from its peculiar elastic
consistence, is known as a _gumma_. In its early stages a gumma is a
firm, semi-translucent greyish or greyish-red mass of tissue; later it
becomes opaque, yellow, and caseous, with a tendency to soften and
liquefy. The gumma does harm by displacing and replacing the normal
tissue elements of the part affected, and by involving these in the
degenerative changes, of the nature of caseation and necrosis, which
produce the destructive lesions of the skin, mucous membranes, and
internal organs. This is true not only of the circumscribed gumma, but
of the condition known as _gummatous infiltration_ or _syphilitic
cirrhosis_, in which the granulation tissue is diffused throughout the
connective-tissue framework of such organs as the tongue or liver. Both
the gummatous lesions and the fibrosis of tertiary syphilis are directly
excited by the spirochaetes.

The life-history of an untreated gumma varies with its environment. When
protected from injury and irritation in the substance of an internal
organ such as the liver, it may become encapsulated by fibrous tissue,
and persist in this condition for an indefinite period, or it may be
absorbed and leave in its place a fibrous cicatrix. In the interior of a
long bone it may replace the rigid framework of the shaft to such an
extent as to lead to pathological fracture. If it is near the surface of
the body--as, for example, in the subcutaneous or submucous cellular
tissue, or in the periosteum of a superficial bone, such as the palate,
the skull, or the tibia--the tissue of which it is composed is apt to
undergo necrosis, in which the overlying skin or mucous membrane
frequently participates, the result being an ulcer--the tertiary
syphilitic ulcer (Figs. 40 and 41).

_Tertiary Lesions of the Skin and Subcutaneous Cellular Tissue._--The
clinical features of a _subcutaneous gumma_ are those of an indolent,
painless, elastic swelling, varying in size from a pea to an almond or
walnut. After a variable period it usually softens in the centre, the
skin over it becomes livid and dusky, and finally separates as a slough,
exposing the tissue of the gumma, which sometimes appears as a mucoid,
yellowish, honey-like substance, more frequently as a sodden, caseated
tissue resembling wash-leather. The caseated tissue of a gumma differs
from that of a tuberculous lesion in being tough and firm, of a buff
colour like wash-leather, or whitish, like boiled fish. The degenerated
tissue separates slowly and gradually, and in untreated cases may be
visible for weeks in the floor of the ulcer.

[Illustration: FIG. 40.--Ulcerating Gumma of Lips.

(From a photograph lent by Dr. Stopford Taylor and Dr. R. W. Mackenna.)]

_The tertiary ulcer_ may be situated anywhere, but is most frequently
met with on the leg, especially in the region of the knee (Fig. 42) and
over the calf. There may be one or more ulcers, and also scars of
antecedent ulcers. The edges are sharply cut, as if punched out; the
margins are rounded in outline, firm, and congested; the base is
occupied by gummatous tissue, or, if this has already separated and
sloughed out, by unhealthy granulations and a thick purulent discharge.
When the ulcer has healed it leaves a scar which is depressed, and if
over a bone, is adherent to it. The features of the tertiary ulcer,
however, are not always so characteristic as the above description would
imply. It is to be diagnosed from the "leg ulcer," which occurs almost
exclusively on the lower third of the leg; from Bazin's disease (p. 74);
from the ulcers that result from certain forms of malignant disease,
such as rodent cancer, and from those met with in chronic glanders.

_Gummatous Infiltration of the Skin_ ("Syphilitic Lupus").--This is a
lesion, met with chiefly on the face and in the region of the external
genitals, in which the skin becomes infiltrated with granulation tissue
so that it is thickened, raised above the surface, and of a brownish-red
colour. It appears as isolated nodules, which may fuse together; the
epidermis becomes scaly and is shed, giving rise to superficial ulcers
which are usually covered by crusted discharge. The disease tends to
spread, creeping over the skin with a serpiginous, crescentic, or
horse-shoe margin, while the central portion may heal and leave a scar.
From the fact of its healing in the centre while it spreads at the
margin, it may resemble tuberculous disease of the skin. It can usually
be differentiated by observing that the infiltration is on a larger
scale; the progress is much more rapid, involving in the course of
months an area which in the case of tuberculosis would require as many
years; the scars are sounder and are less liable to break down again;
and the disease rapidly yields to anti-syphilitic treatment.

[Illustration: FIG. 41.--Ulceration of nineteen year's duration
in a woman aet. 24, the subject of inherited syphilis, showing active
ulceration, cicatricial contraction, and sabre-blade deformity of
tibiae.]

_Tertiary lesions of mucous membrane and of the submucous cellular
tissue_ are met with chiefly in the tongue, nose, throat, larynx, and
rectum. They originate as gummata or as gummatous infiltrations, which
are liable to break down and lead to the formation of ulcers which may
prove locally destructive, and, in such situations as the larynx, even
dangerous to life. In the tongue the tertiary ulcer may prove the
starting-point of cancer; and in the larynx or rectum the healing of the
ulcer may lead to cicatricial stenosis.

Tertiary lesions of the _bones and joints_, of the _muscles_, and of the
_internal organs_, will be described under these heads. The part played
by syphilis in the production of disease of arteries and of aneurysm
will be referred to along with diseases of blood vessels.

[Illustration: FIG. 42.--Tertiary Syphilitic Ulceration in region of
Knee and on both Thumbs of woman aet. 37.]

_Treatment._--The most valuable drugs for the treatment of the
manifestations of the tertiary period are the arsenical preparations and
the iodides of sodium and potassium. On account of their depressing
effects, the latter are frequently prescribed along with carbonate of
ammonium. The dose is usually a matter of experiment in each individual
case; 5 grains three times a day may suffice, or it may be necessary to
increase each dose to 20 or 25 grains. The symptoms of iodism which may
follow from the smaller doses usually disappear on giving a larger
amount of the drug. It should be taken after meals, with abundant water
or other fluid, especially if given in tablet form. It is advisable to
continue the iodides for from one to three months after the lesions for
which they are given have cleared up. If the potassium salt is not
tolerated, it may be replaced by the ammonium or sodium iodide.

_Local Treatment._--The absorption of a subcutaneous gumma is often
hastened by the application of a fly-blister. When a gumma has broken on
the surface and caused an ulcer, this is treated on general principles,
with a preference, however, for applications containing mercury or
iodine, or both. If a wet dressing is required to cleanse the ulcer,
black wash may be used; if a powder to promote dryness, one containing
iodoform; if an ointment is indicated, the choice lies between the red
oxide of mercury or the dilute nitrate of mercury ointment, and one
consisting of equal parts of lanolin and vaselin with 2 per cent. of
iodine. Deep ulcers, and obstinate lesions of the bones, larynx, and
other parts may be treated by excision or scraping with the sharp spoon.

#Second Attacks of Syphilis.#--Instances of re-infection of syphilis
have been recorded with greater frequency since the more general
introduction of arsenical treatment. A remarkable feature in such cases
is the shortness of the interval between the original infection and the
alleged re-infection; in a recent series of twenty-eight cases, this
interval was less than a year. Another feature of interest is that when
patients in the tertiary stage of syphilis are inoculated with the virus
from lesions from these in the primary and secondary stage lesions of
the tertiary type are produced.

Reference may be made to the #relapsing false indurated chancre#,
described by Hutchinson and by Fournier, as it may be the source of
difficulty in diagnosis. A patient who has had an infecting chancre one
or more years before, may present a slightly raised induration on the
penis at or close to the site of his original sore. This relapsed
induration is often so like that of a primary chancre that it is
impossible to distinguish between them, except by the history. If there
has been a recent exposure to venereal infection, it is liable to be
regarded as the primary lesion of a second attack of syphilis, but the
further progress shows that neither bullet-buboes nor secondary
manifestations develop. These facts, together with the disappearance of
the induration under treatment, make it very likely that the lesion is
really gummatous in character.


INHERITED SYPHILIS

One of the most striking features of syphilis is that it may be
transmitted from infected parents to their offspring, the children
exhibiting the manifestations that characterise the acquired form of the
disease.

The more recent the syphilis in the parent, the greater is the risk of
the disease being communicated to the offspring; so that if either
parent suffers from secondary syphilis the infection is almost
inevitably transmitted.

While it is certain that either parent may be responsible for
transmitting the disease to the next generation, the method of
transmission is not known. In the case of a syphilitic mother it is most
probable that the infection is conveyed to the foetus by the placental
circulation. In the case of a syphilitic father, it is commonly believed
that the infection is conveyed to the ovum through the seminal fluid at
the moment of conception. If a series of children, one after the other,
suffer from inherited syphilis, it is almost invariably the case that
the mother has been infected.

In contrast to the acquired form, inherited syphilis is remarkable for
the absence of any primary stage, the infection being a general one from
the outset. The spirochaete is demonstrated in incredible numbers in the
liver, spleen, lung, and other organs, and in the nasal secretion, and,
from any of these, successful inoculations in monkeys can readily be
made. The manifestations differ in degree rather than in kind from those
of the acquired disease; the difference is partly due to the fact that
the virus is attacking developing instead of fully formed tissues.

The virus exercises an injurious influence on the foetus, which in many
cases dies during the early months of intra-uterine life, so that
miscarriage results, and this may take place in repeated pregnancies,
the date at which the miscarriage occurs becoming later as the virus in
the mother becomes attenuated. Eventually a child is carried to full
term, and it may be still-born, or, if born alive, may suffer from
syphilitic manifestations. It is difficult to explain such vagaries of
syphilitic inheritance as the infection of one twin and the escape of
the other.

_Clinical Features._--We are not here concerned with the severe forms of
the disease which prove fatal, but with the milder forms in which the
infant is apparently healthy when born, but after from two to six weeks
begins to show evidence of the syphilitic taint.

The usual phenomena are that the child ceases to thrive, becomes thin
and sallow, and suffers from eruptions on the skin and mucous membranes.
There is frequently a condition known as _snuffles_, in which the nasal
passages are obstructed by an accumulation of thin muco-purulent
discharge which causes the breathing to be noisy. It usually begins
within a month after birth and before the eruptions on the skin appear.
When long continued it is liable to interfere with the development of
the nasal bones, so that when the child grows up there results a
condition known as the "saddle-nose" deformity (Figs. 43 and 44).

[Illustration: FIG. 43.--Facies of Inherited Syphilis.

(From Dr. Byrom Bramwell's _Atlas of Clinical Medicine_.)]

_Affections of the Skin._--Although all types of skin affection are met
with in the inherited disease, the most important is a _papular_
eruption, the papules being of large size, with a smooth shining top and
of a reddish-brown colour. It affects chiefly the buttocks and thighs,
the genitals, and other parts which are constantly moist. It is
necessary to distinguish this specific eruption from a form of eczema
which occurs in these situations in non-syphilitic children, the points
that characterise the syphilitic condition being the infiltration of the
skin and the coppery colour of the eruption. At the anus the papules
acquire the characters of _condylomata_, also at the angles of the
mouth, where they often ulcerate and leave radiating scars.

_Affections of the Mucous Membranes._--The inflammation of the nasal
mucous membrane that causes snuffles has already been referred to. There
may be mucous patches in the mouth, or a stomatitis which is of
importance, because it results in interference with the development of
the permanent teeth. The mucous membrane of the larynx may be the seat
of mucous patches or of catarrh, and as a result the child's cry is
hoarse.

_Affections of the Bones._--Swellings at the ends of the long bones, due
to inflammation at the epiphysial junctions, are most often observed at
the upper end of the humerus and in the bones in the region of the
elbow. Partial displacement and mobility at the ossifying junction may
be observed. The infant cries when the part is touched; and as it does
not move the limb voluntarily, the condition is spoken of as _the
pseudo-paralysis of syphilis_. Recovery takes place under
anti-syphilitic treatment and immobilisation of the limb.

Diffuse thickening of the shafts of the long bones, due to a deposit of
new bone by the periosteum, is sometimes met with.

[Illustration: FIG. 44.--Facies of Inherited Syphilis.]

The conditions of the skull known as Parrot's nodes or bosses, and
craniotabes, were formerly believed to be characteristic of inherited
syphilis, but they are now known to occur, particularly in rickety
children, from other causes. The _bosses_ result from the heaping up of
new spongy bone beneath the pericranium, and they may be grouped
symmetrically around the anterior fontanelle, or may extend along either
side of the sagittal suture, which appears as a deep groove--the
"natiform skull." The bosses disappear in time, but the skull may remain
permanently altered in shape, the frontal and parietal eminences
appearing unduly prominent. The term _craniotabes_ is applied when the
bone becomes thin and soft, reverting to its original membranous
condition, so that the affected areas dimple under the finger like
parchment or thin cardboard; its localisation in the posterior parts of
the skull suggests that the disappearance of the osseous tissue is
influenced by the pressure of the head on the pillow. Craniotabes is
recovered from as the child improves in health.

Between the ages of three and six months, certain other phenomena may be
met with, such as _effusion into the joints_, especially the knees;
_iritis_, in one or in both eyes, and enlargement of the spleen and
liver.

In the majority of cases the child recovers from these early
manifestations, especially when efficiently treated, and may enjoy an
indefinite period of good health. On the other hand, when it attains the
age of from two to four years, it may begin to manifest lesions which
correspond to those of the tertiary period of acquired syphilis.

#Later Lesions.#--In the skin and subcutaneous tissue, the later
manifestations may take the form of localised gummata, which tend to
break down and form ulcers, on the leg for example, or of a spreading
gummatous infiltration which is also liable to ulcerate, leaving
disfiguring scars, especially on the face. The palate and fauces may be
destroyed by ulceration. In the nose, especially when the ulcerative
process is associated with a putrid discharge--ozaena--the destruction of
tissue may be considerable and result in unsightly deformity. The entire
palatal portions of the upper jaws, the vomer, turbinate, and other
bones bounding the nasal and oral cavities, may disappear, so that on
looking into the mouth the base of the skull is readily seen. Gummatous
disease is frequently observed also in the flat bones of the skull, in
the bones of the hand, as syphilitic dactylitis, and in the bones of the
forearm and leg. When the tibia is affected the disease is frequently
bilateral, and may assume the form of gummatous ulcers and sinuses. In
later years the tibia may present alterations in shape resulting from
antecedent gummatous disease--for example, nodular thickenings of the
shaft, flattening of the crest, or a more uniform increase in thickness
and length of the shaft of the bone, which, when it is curved in
addition, is described as the "sabre-blade" deformity. Among lesions of
the viscera, mention should be made of gumma of the testis, which causes
the organ to become enlarged, uneven, and indurated. This has even been
observed in infants a few months old.

Occasionally a syphilitic child suffers from a succession of these
gummatous lesions with resulting ill-health, and, it may be, waxy
disease of the internal organs; on the other hand, it may recover and
present no further manifestations of the inherited taint.

_Affections of the Eyes._--At or near puberty there is frequently
observed an affection of the eyes, known as _chronic interstitial
keratitis_, the relationship of which to inherited syphilis was first
established by Hutchinson. It occurs between the ages of six and sixteen
years, and usually affects one eye before the other. It commences as a
diffuse haziness or steaminess near the centre of the cornea, and as it
spreads the entire cornea assumes the appearance of ground glass. The
chief complaint is of dimness of sight, which may almost amount to
blindness, but there is little pain or photophobia; a certain amount of
conjunctival and ciliary congestion is usually present, and there may be
_iritis_ in addition. The cornea, or parts of it, may become of a deep
pink or salmon colour from the formation in it of new blood vessels. The
affection may last for from eighteen months to two years. Complete
recovery usually takes place, but slight opacities, especially in the
site of former salmon patches, may persist, and the disease occasionally
relapses. _Choroiditis_ and _retinitis_ may also occur, and leave
permanent changes easily recognised on examination with the
ophthalmoscope.

Among the rarer and more serious lesions of the inherited disease may be
mentioned gummatous disease in the _larynx and trachea_, attended with
ulceration and resulting in stenosis; and lesions of the _nervous
system_ which may result in convulsions, paralysis, or dementia.

In a limited number of cases, about the period of puberty there may
develop _deafness_, which is usually bilateral and may become absolute.

_Changes in the Permanent Teeth._--These affect specially the upper
central incisors, which are dwarfed and stand somewhat apart in the gum,
with their free edges converging towards one another. They are tapering
or peg-shaped, and present at their cutting margin a deep semilunar
notch. These appearances are commonly associated with the name of
Hutchinson, who first described them. Affecting as they do the
permanent teeth, they are not available for diagnosis until the child is
over eight years of age. Henry Moon drew attention to a change in the
first molars; these are reduced in size and dome-shaped through dwarfing
of the central tubercle of each cusp.

#Diagnosis of Inherited Syphilis.#--When there is a typical eruption on
the buttocks and snuffles there is no difficulty in recognising the
disease. When, however, the rash is scanty or is obscured by co-existing
eczema, most reliance should be placed on the distribution of the
eruption, on the brown stains which are left after it has passed off, on
the presence of condylomata, and of fissuring and scarring at the angles
of the mouth. The history of the mother relative to repeated
miscarriages and still-born children may afford confirmatory evidence.
In doubtful cases, the diagnosis may be aided by the Wassermann test and
by noting the therapeutic effects of grey powder, which, in syphilitic
infants, usually effects a marked and rapid improvement both in the
symptoms and in the general health.

While a considerable number of syphilitic children grow up without
showing any trace of their syphilitic inheritance, the majority retain
throughout life one or more of the following characteristics, which may
therefore be described as _permanent signs of the inherited disease_:
Dwarfing of stature from interference with growth at the epiphysial
junctions; the forehead low and vertical, and the parietal and frontal
eminences unduly prominent; the bridge of the nose sunken and rounded;
radiating scars at the angles of the mouth; perforation or destruction
of the hard palate; Hutchinson's teeth; opacities of the cornea from
antecedent keratitis; alterations in the fundus oculi from choroiditis;
deafness; depressed scars or nodes on the bones from previous gummata;
"sabre-blade" or other deformity of the tibiae.

#The Contagiousness of Inherited Syphilis.#--In 1837, Colles of Dublin
stated his belief that, while a syphilitic infant may convey the disease
to a healthy wet nurse, it is incapable of infecting its own mother if
nursed by her, even although she may never have shown symptoms of the
disease. This doctrine, which is known as _Colles' law_, is generally
accepted in spite of the alleged occurrence of occasional exceptions.
The older the child, the less risk there is of its communicating the
disease to others, until eventually the tendency dies out altogether, as
it does in the tertiary period of acquired syphilis. It should be
added, however, that the contagiousness of inherited syphilis is denied
by some observers, who affirm that, when syphilitic infants prove
infective, the disease has been really acquired at or soon after birth.

There is general agreement that the subjects of inherited syphilis
cannot transmit the disease by inheritance to their offspring, and that,
although they very rarely acquire the disease _de novo_, it is possible
for them to do so.

#Prognosis of Inherited Syphilis.#--Although inherited syphilis is
responsible for a large but apparently diminishing mortality in infancy,
the subjects of this disease may grow up to be as strong and healthy as
their neighbours. Hutchinson insisted on the fact that there is little
bad health in the general community that can be attributed to inherited
syphilis.

#Treatment.#--Arsenical injections are as beneficial in the inherited as
in the acquired disease. An infant the subject of inherited syphilis
should, if possible, be nursed by its mother, and failing this it should
be fed by hand. In infants at the breast, the drug may be given to the
mother; in others, it is administered in the same manner as already
described--only in smaller doses. On the first appearance of syphilitic
manifestations it should be given 0.05 grm, novarsenbillon, injected
into the deep subcutaneous tissues every week for six weeks, followed by
one year's mercurial inunction--a piece of mercurial ointment the size
of a pea being inserted under the infant's binder. In older children the
dose is proportionately increased. The general health should be improved
in every possible direction; considerable benefit may be derived from
the use of cod-liver oil, and from preparations containing iron and
calcium. Surgical interference may be required in the destructive
gummatous lesions of the nose, throat, larynx, and bones, either with
the object of arresting the spread of the disease, or of removing or
alleviating the resulting deformities. In children suffering from
keratitis, the eyes should be protected from the light by smoked or
coloured glasses, and the pupils should be dilated with atropin from
time to time, especially in cases complicated with iritis.

#Acquired Syphilis in Infants and Young Children.#--When syphilis is met
with in infants and young children, it is apt to be taken for granted
that the disease has been inherited. It is possible, however, for them
to acquire the disease--as, for example, while passing through the
maternal passages during birth, through being nursed or kissed by
infected women, or through the rite of circumcision. The risk of
infection which formerly existed by the arm-to-arm method of
vaccination has been abolished by the use of calf lymph.

The clinical features of the acquired disease in infants and young
children are similar to those observed in the adult, with a tendency,
however, to be more severe, probably because the disease is often late
in being recognised and treated.




CHAPTER X

TUMOURS[2]


Definition--Etiology--General characters of innocent and malignant
    tumours. CLASSIFICATION OF TUMOURS: I. Connective-tissue tumours:
    (1) _Innocent_: _Lipoma_, _Xanthoma_, _Chondroma_, _Osteoma_,
    _Odontoma_, _Fibroma_, _Myxoma_, _Endothelioma_, etc.; (2)
    _Malignant_: _Sarcoma_--II. Epithelial tumours: (1) _Innocent_:
    _Papilloma_, _Adenoma_, _Cystic Adenoma_; (2) _Malignant_:
    _Epithelioma_, _Glandular Cancer_, _Rodent Cancer_, _Melanotic
    Cancer_--III. Dermoids--IV. Teratoma. Cysts: _Retention_,
    _Exudation_, _Implantation_, _Parasitic_, _Lymphatic or Serous_.
    Ganglion.

[2] For the histology of tumours the reader is referred to a text-book
of pathology.

A tumour or neoplasm is a localised swelling composed of newly formed
tissue which fulfils no physiological function. Tumours increase in size
quite independently of the growth of the body, and there is no natural
termination to their growth. They are to be distinguished from such
over-growths as are of the nature of simple hypertrophy or local
giantism, and also from inflammatory swellings, which usually develop
under the influence of a definite cause, have a natural termination, and
tend to disappear when the cause ceases to act.

The _etiology of tumours_ is imperfectly understood. Various factors,
acting either singly or in combination, may be concerned in their
development. Certain tumours, for example, are the result of some
congenital malformation of the particular tissue from which they take
origin. This would appear to be the case in many tumours of blood
vessels (angioma), of cartilage (chondroma), of bone (osteoma), and of
secreting gland tissue (adenoma). The theory that tumours originate from
foetal residues or "rests," is associated with the name of Cohnheim.
These rests are supposed to be undifferentiated embryonic cells which
remain embedded amongst fully formed tissue elements, and lie dormant
until they are excited into active growth and give rise to a tumour.
This mode of origin is illustrated by the development of dermoids from
sequestrated portions of epidermis.

Among the local factors concerned in the development of tumours,
reference must be made to the influence of irritation. This is probably
an important agent in the causation of many of the tumours met with in
the skin and in mucous membranes--for example, cancer of the skin, of
the lip, and of the tongue. The part played by injury is doubtful. It
not infrequently happens that the development of a tumour is preceded by
an injury of the part in which it grows, but it does not necessarily
follow that the injury and the tumour are related as cause and effect.
It is possible that an injury may stimulate into active growth
undifferentiated tissue elements or "rests," and so determine the growth
of a tumour, or that it may alter the characters of a tumour which
already exists, causing it to grow more rapidly.

The popular belief that there is some constitutional peculiarity
concerned in the causation of tumours is largely based on the fact that
certain forms of new growth--for example, cancer--are known to occur
with undue frequency in certain families. The same influence is more
striking in the case of certain innocent tumours--particularly multiple
osteomas and lipomas--which are hereditary in the same sense as
supernumerary or webbed fingers, and appear in members of the same
family through several generations.


INNOCENT AND MALIGNANT TUMOURS

For clinical purposes, tumours are arbitrarily divided into two
classes--the innocent and the malignant. The outstanding difference
between them is, that while the evil effects of innocent tumours are
entirely local and depend for their severity on the environment of the
growth, malignant tumours wherever situated, in addition to producing
similar local effects, injure the general health and ultimately cause
death.

_Innocent_, benign, or simple tumours present a close structural
resemblance to the normal tissues of the body. They grow slowly, and are
usually definitely circumscribed by a fibrous capsule, from which they
are easily enucleated, and they do not tend to recur after removal. In
their growth they merely push aside and compress adjacent parts, and
they present no tendency to ulcerate and bleed unless the overlying skin
or mucous membrane is injured. Although usually solitary, some are
multiple from the outset--for example, fatty, fibrous, and bony tumours,
warts, and fibroid tumours of the uterus. They produce no constitutional
disturbance. They only threaten life when growing in the vicinity of
vital organs, and then only in virtue of their situation--for example,
death may result from an innocent tumour in the air-passage causing
suffocation, in the intestine causing obstruction of the bowels, or in
the vertebral canal causing pressure on the spinal medulla.

_Malignant tumours_ usually show a marked departure from the structure
and arrangement of the normal tissues of the body. Although the cells of
which they are composed are derived from normal tissue cells, they tend
to take on a lower, more vegetative form; they may be regarded as
parasites living at the expense of the organism, multiplying
indefinitely and destroying everything with which they come in contact.

Malignant tumours grow more rapidly than innocent tumours, and tend to
infiltrate their surroundings by sending out prolongations or offshoots;
they are therefore liable to recur after an operation which is
restricted to the removal of the main tumour. They are not encapsulated,
although they may appear to be circumscribed by condensation of the
surrounding tissues; they are rarely multiple at the outset, but show a
marked tendency to spread to other parts of the body. Fragments of the
parent tumour may become separated and be carried off in the lymph or
blood-stream and deposited in other parts of the body, where they give
rise to secondary growths. Malignant tumours tend to invade and destroy
the overlying skin or mucous membrane, and thus give rise to bleeding
ulcers; if the tumour tissue protrudes through the gap in the skin, it
is said to _fungate_. In course of time they give rise to a condition of
ill-health or _cachexia_, the patient becoming pale, sallow, feverish,
and emaciated, probably as a result of chronic poisoning from the
absorption of toxic products from the tumour. They ultimately destroy
life, it may be by their local effects, such as ulceration and
haemorrhage, by favouring the entrance of septic infection, by
interfering with the function of organs which are essential to life, by
cachexia, or by a combination of these effects.

The situation of a malignant tumour exercises considerable influence on
the rapidity, as well as on the mode, in which it causes death. Some
cancers, such as that known as "rodent," show malignant features which
are entirely local, while others, such as melanotic cancer, exhibit a
malignancy characterised by rapid generalisation of growths throughout
the body. Tumours that are structurally alike may show variations in
malignancy, according to their situation and to the age of the patient,
as well as to other factors which are as yet unknown.

In attempting to arrive at a conclusion as to the innocence or
malignancy of any tumour, too much reliance must not be placed on its
histological features; its situation, rate of growth, and other clinical
features must also be taken into consideration. It cannot be too
emphatically stated that there is no hard-and-fast line between innocent
and malignant growths; there is an indefinite transition from one to the
other. The possibility of the transformation of a benign into a
malignant tumour must be admitted. Such a transformation implies a
change in the structure of the growth, and has been observed especially
in fibrous and cartilaginous tumours, in tumours of the thyreoid gland,
and in uterine fibroids. The alteration in character may take place
under the influence of injury, prolonged or repeated irritation,
incomplete removal of the benign tumour by operation, or the altered
physiological conditions of the tissues which attend upon advancing
years.

After a tumour has been removed by operation it should as a routine
measure be subjected to microscopical examination; the results are often
instructive and sometimes other than what was expected.

#Varieties of Tumours.#--In the following description, tumours are
classified on an anatomical basis, taking in order first the
connective-tissue group and subsequently those that originate in
epithelium.


INNOCENT CONNECTIVE-TISSUE TUMOURS

#Lipoma.#--A lipoma is composed of fat resembling that normally present
in the body. The commonest variety is the _subcutaneous lipoma_, which
grows from the subcutaneous fat, and forms a soft, irregularly lobulated
tumour (Fig. 45). The fat is arranged in lobules separated by
connective-tissue septa, which are continuous with the capsule
surrounding the tumour and with the overlying skin, which becomes
dimpled or puckered when an attempt is made to pinch it up. As the fat
is almost fluid at the body temperature, fluctuation can usually be
detected. These tumours vary greatly in size, occur at all ages, grow
slowly, and, while generally solitary, are sometimes multiple. They are
most commonly met with on the shoulder, buttock, or back. In certain
situations, such as the thigh and perineum, they tend to become
pedunculated (Fig. 46).

A fatty tumour is to be diagnosed from a cold abscess and from a cyst.
The distinguishing features of the lipoma are the tacking down and
dimpling of the overlying skin, the lobulation of the tumour, which is
recognised when it is pressed upon with the flat of the hand, and, more
reliable than either of these, the mobility, the tumour slipping away
when pressed upon at its margin.

[Illustration: FIG. 45.--Subcutaneous Lipoma showing lobulation.]

The prognosis is more favourable than in any other tumour as it never
changes its characters; the only reasons for its removal by operation
are its unsightliness and its probable increase in size in the course of
years. The operation consists in dividing the skin and capsule over the
tumour and shelling it out. Care must be taken that none of the outlying
lobules are left behind. If the overlying skin is damaged or closely
adherent, it should be removed along with the tumour.

[Illustration: FIG. 46.--Pedunculated Lipoma of Buttock of forty years'
duration in a woman aet. 68.]

_Multiple subcutaneous lipomas_ are frequently symmetrical, and in a
certain group of cases, met with chiefly in women, pain is a prominent
symptom, hence the term _adiposis dolorosa_ (Dercum). These multiple
tumours show little or no tendency to increase in size, and the pain
which attends their development does not persist.

In the neck, axilla, and pubes a diffuse overgrowth of the subcutaneous
fat is sometimes met with, forming symmetrical tumour-like masses, known
as _diffuse lipoma_. As this is not, strictly speaking, a tumour, the
term _diffuse lipomatosis_ is to be preferred. A similar condition was
described by Jonathan Hutchinson as being met with in the domestic
animals. If causing disfigurement, the mass of fat may be removed by
operation.

[Illustration: FIG. 47.--Diffuse Lipomatosis of Neck.]

_Lipoma in other Situations._--The _periosteal lipoma_ is usually
congenital, and is most often met with in the hand; it forms a
projecting lobulated tumour, which, when situated in the palm, resembles
an angioma or a lymphangioma. The _subserous lipoma_ arises from the
extra-peritoneal fat in the posterior abdominal wall, in which case it
tends to grow forwards between the layers of the mesentery and to give
rise to an abdominal tumour; or it may grow from the extra-peritoneal
fat in the anterior abdominal wall and protrude from one of the hernial
openings or through an abnormal opening in the parietes, constituting a
_fatty hernia_. A _subsynovial lipoma_ grows from the fat surrounding
the synovial membrane of a joint, and projects into its interior, giving
rise to the symptoms of loose body. Lipomas are also met with growing
from the adipose connective tissue _between or in the substance of
muscles_, and, when situated beneath the deep fascia, such as the fascia
lata of the thigh, the characteristic signs are obscured and a
differential diagnosis is difficult. It may be differentiated from a
cold abscess by puncture with an exploring needle.

[Illustration: FIG. 48.--Zanthoma of Hands in a girl aet. 14, showing
multiple subcutaneous tumours (cf. Fig. 49).

(Sir H. J. Stiles' case.)]

#Zanthoma# is a rare but interesting form of tumour, composed of a
fibrous and fatty tissue, containing a granular orange-yellow pigment,
resembling that of the corpus luteum. It originates in the corium and
presents two clinical varieties. In the first of these, it occurs in the
form of raised yellow patches, usually in the skin of the eyelids of
persons after middle life, and in many instances is associated with
chronic jaundice; the patches are often symmetrical, and as they
increase in size they tend to fuse with another.

The second form occurs in children and adolescents; it may affect
several generations of the same family, and is often multiple, there
being a combination of thickened yellow patches of skin and projecting
tumours, some of which may attain a considerable size (Figs. 48 and 49).
On section, the tumour tissue presents a brilliant orange or saffron
colour.

There is no indication for removing the tumours unless for the deformity
which they cause; exposure to the X-rays is to be preferred to
operation.

[Illustration: FIG. 49.--Zanthoma showing Subcutaneous Tumours on
Buttocks. From same patient as Fig. 48.]

#Chondroma.#--A chondroma is mainly composed of cartilage. Processes of
vascular connective tissue pass in between the nodules of cartilage
composing the tumour from the fibrous capsule which surrounds it. On
section it is of a greyish-blue colour and semi-translucent. The tumour
is firm and elastic in consistence, but certain portions may be densely
hard from calcification or ossification, while other portions may be
soft and fluctuating as a result of myxomatous degeneration and
liquefaction. These tumours grow slowly and painlessly, and may surround
nerves and arteries without injuring them. They may cause a deep hollow
in the bone from which they originate. All intermediate forms between
the innocent chondroma and the malignant chondro-sarcoma are met with.
Chondroma may occur in a multiple form, especially in relation to the
phalanges and metacarpal bones. When growing in the interior of a bone
it causes a spindle-shaped enlargement of the shaft, which in the case
of a phalanx or metacarpal bone may resemble the dactylitis resulting
from tubercle or syphilis. A chondroma appears as a clear area in a
skiagram.

A _skiagram_ of a bone in which there is a chondroma shows a clear
rounded area in the position of the tumour, which must be differentiated
from similar clear areas due to other kinds of tumour, especially the
myeloma; when it has undergone calcification or ossification, it gives a
shadow as dark as bone.

[Illustration: FIG. 50.--Chondroma growing from infraspinous fossa of
Scapula.]

[Illustration: FIG. 51.--Chondroma of Metacarpal Bone of Thumb.]

_Treatment._--In view of the unstable quality of the chondroma,
especially of its liability to become malignant, it should be removed as
soon as it is recognised. In those projecting from the surface of a
bone, both the tumour and its capsule should be removed. If in the
interior, a sufficient amount of the cortex should be removed to allow
of the tumour being scraped out, and care must be taken that no nodules
of cartilage are left behind. In multiple chondromas of the hand, when
the fingers are crippled and useless, exposure to the X-rays should be
given a trial, and in extreme cases the question of amputation may have
to be considered. When a cartilaginous tumour takes on active growth, it
must be treated as malignant.

The chondromas that are met with at the ends of the long bones in
children and young adults form a group by themselves. They are usually
related to the epiphysial cartilage, and it was suggested by Virchow
that they take origin from islands of cartilage which have not been used
up in the process of ossification. They are believed to occur more
frequently in those who have suffered from rickets. They have no
malignant tendencies and tend to undergo ossification concurrently with
the epiphysial cartilage from which they take origin, and constitute
what are known as _cartilaginous exostoses_. These are sometimes met
with in a multiple form, and may occur in several generations of the
same family. They are considered in greater detail in the chapter
dealing with tumours of bone.

Minute nodules of cartilage sometimes form in the synovial membrane of
joints and lining of tendon sheaths and bursae: they tend to become
detached from the membrane and constitute loose bodies; they also
undergo a variable amount of calcification and ossification, so as to be
visible in skiagrams. They are further considered with loose bodies in
joints.

Cartilaginous tumours in the parotid, submaxillary gland, and testicle
belong to a class of "mixed tumours" that will be referred to later.

#Osteoma.#--The true osteoma is composed of bony tissue, and originates
from the skeleton. Two varieties are recognised--the spongy or
cancellous, and the ivory or compact. The _spongy_ or _cancellous
osteoma_ is really an ossified chondroma, and is met with at the ends of
the long bones (Fig. 52). From the fact that it projects from the
surface of the bone it is often spoken of as an _exostosis_. It grows
slowly, and rarely causes any discomfort unless it presses upon a
nerve-trunk or upon a bursa which has developed over it. The Rontgen
rays show a dark shadow corresponding to the ossified portion of the
tumour, and continuous with that of the bone from which it is growing
(Fig. 138). Operative interference is only indicated when the tumour is
giving rise to inconvenience. It is then removed, its base or neck being
divided by means of the chisel. The multiple variety of osteoma is
considered with the diseases of bone.

The bony outgrowth from the terminal phalanx of the great toe--known as
the _subungual exostosis_--is described and figured on p. 404. Bony
projections or "spurs" sometimes occur on the under surface of the
calcaneus, and, projecting downwards and forwards from the greater
process, cause pain on putting the heel to the ground.

[Illustration: FIG. 52.--Cancellous Osteoma of lower end of Femur.]

The _ivory_ or _compact osteoma_ is composed of dense bone, and usually
grows from the skull. It is generally sessile and solitary, and may grow
into the interior of the skull, into the frontal sinus, into the cavity
of the orbit or nose, or may fill up the external auditory meatus,
causing most unsightly deformity and interference with sight, breathing,
and hearing.

Bony formations occur in _muscles and tendons_, especially at their
points of attachment to the skeleton, and are known as false exostoses;
they are described with the diseases of muscles.

#Odontoma.#--An odontoma is composed of dental tissues in varying
proportions and different degrees of development, arising from
tooth-germs or from teeth still in process of growth (Bland Sutton).
Odontomas resemble teeth in so far that during their development they
remain hidden below the mucous membrane and give no evidence of their
existence. There then succeeds, usually between the twentieth and
twenty-fifth years, an eruptive stage, which is often attended with
suppuration, and this may be the means of drawing attention to the
tumour. Following Bland Sutton, several varieties of odontoma may be
distinguished according to the part of the tooth-germ concerned in their
formation.

The _epithelial odontoma_ is derived from persistent portions of the
epithelium of the enamel organ, and constitutes a multilocular cystic
tumour which is chiefly met with in the mandible. The cystic spaces of
the tumour contain a brownish glairy fluid. These tumours have been
described by Eve under the name of multilocular cystic epithelial
tumours of the jaw.

The _follicular odontoma_, also known as a _dentigerous cyst_, is
derived from the distension of a tooth follicle. It constitutes a cyst
containing a viscid fluid, and an imperfectly formed tooth is often
found embedded in its wall. The cyst usually forms in relation to one of
the permanent molars, and may attain considerable dimensions.

The _fibrous odontoma_ is the result of an overgrowth of fibrous tissue
surrounding the tooth sac, which encapsulates the tooth and prevents its
eruption. The thickened tooth sac is usually mistaken for a fibrous
tumour, until, after removal, the tooth is recognised in its interior.

_Composite Odontoma._--This is a convenient term to apply to certain
hard dental tumours which are met with in the jaws, and consist of
enamel, dentine, and cement. The tumour is to be regarded as being
derived from an abnormal growth of all the elements of a tooth germ, or
of two or more tooth germs, indiscriminately fused with one another. It
may appear in childhood, and form a smooth unyielding tumour, often of
considerable size, replacing the corresponding permanent tooth. It may
cause a purulent discharge, and in some cases it has been extruded after
sloughing of the overlying soft parts. Many examples of this variety of
odontoma, growing in the nasal cavity or in the maxillary sinus, have
been erroneously regarded as osteomas even after removal.

On section, the tumour is usually laminated, and is seen to consist
mainly of dentine with a partial covering of enamel and cement.

_Diagnosis._--Odontomas are often only diagnosed after removal. When
attended with suppuration, the condition has been mistaken for disease
of the jaw. Fibrous odontomas have been mistaken for sarcoma, and
portions of the maxilla removed unnecessarily. Any circumscribed tumour
of the jaw, particularly when met with in a young adult, should suggest
the possibility of an odontoma. Skiagrams often give useful information
both for diagnosis and for treatment.

_Treatment._--The solid varieties of odontoma can usually be shelled out
after dividing the overlying soft parts. In the follicular variety, it
is usually sufficient to excise a portion of the wall, scrape out the
interior, and remove any tooth that may be present. The cavity is then
packed and allowed to heal from the bottom.

#Fibroma.#--A fibroma is a tumour composed of fibrous connective tissue.
A distinction may be made between the _soft fibroma_, which is
comparatively rich in cells and blood vessels, and in which the fibres
are arranged loosely; and the _hard fibroma_, which is composed of
closely packed bundles of fibres often arranged in a concentric fashion
around the blood vessels. The cut surface of the soft fibroma presents a
pinkish-white, fleshy appearance, resembling the slowly growing forms of
sarcoma; that of a hard fibroma presents a dry, glistening appearance,
aptly compared to watered silk. The soft variety grows much more rapidly
than the hard. In certain fibromas--in those, for example, which grow
from the periosteum of the base of the skull and project into the
naso-pharynx--the blood vessels are dilated into sinuses and have no
proper sheaths; they therefore tend to remain open when divided, and to
bleed excessively. Transition forms between soft fibroma and sarcoma are
met with, so that in operating for their removal it is safer to take
away the capsule along with the tumour, and the patient should be kept
under observation in view of the risk of recurrence.

The skin--especially the skin of the buttock--is one of the favourite
seats of fibroma, and it may occur in a multiple form. It is met with
also in the subcutaneous and intermuscular cellular tissue, and in the
abdominal wall, where it sometimes attains considerable dimensions.
Various forms of fibroma are met with in the mamma and are described
with diseases of that organ. The fibrous overgrowths in the skin, known
as _keloid_ and _molluscum fibrosum_, and those met with in the _sheaths
of nerves_, are described elsewhere. Fibroid tumours of the uterus are
described with myoma.

_Diffuse fibroma_ or _Fibromatosis_, analogous to lipomatosis, is met
with in the connective tissue of the skin and sheaths of nerves, and
constitutes one form of neuro-fibromatosis; a similar change is also met
with in the stomach and colon.

#Myxoma.#--A myxoma is composed of tissue of a soft gelatinous,
semifluid consistence. The pure myxoma is extremely rare, and
clinically resembles the lipoma. Myxomatous tissue is, however,
frequently found in other connective-tissue tumours as a result of
degeneration, for example, in cartilaginous tumours and in sarcomas.
Myxomatous tissue is also a prominent constituent of the "innocent
parotid tumour." Mucous polypus of the nose, which is often described as
a myxoma, is merely a pendulous process of oedematous mucous membrane.

[Illustration: FIG. 53.--Myeloma of Shaft of Humerus, causing
pathological fracture. (Mr. J. W. Struthers' case.)

(The unusual site of the tumour is to be noted.)]

#Myeloma.#--A myeloma is composed of large multinuclear giant cells
surrounded by round and spindle cells. The cut surface of the tumour
presents a deep red or maroon colour. While occasionally met with in
tendon sheaths and bursae, and is then of an orange-yellow colour, the
myeloma occurs most frequently in the cancellous tissue at the ends of
the long bones, its favourite site being the upper end of the tibia.
Although formerly classified as a sarcoma, it is the exception for it to
present malignant features, and it can usually be extirpated by local
measures without fear of recurrence. The diagnosis, X-ray appearances,
and the method of removal are considered with the diseases of bone.
Sometimes the myeloma is met with in multiple form in the skeleton, in
association with an unusual form of protein in the urine (Bence Jones).

#Myoma.#--A myoma is composed of non-striped muscle fibres. A pure myoma
is very rare, and is met with in organs possessed of non-striped muscle,
such as the stomach, intestine, urinary bladder, and prostate. In the
uterus, which is the most common situation, these tumours contain a
considerable admixture of fibrous tissue, and are known as _fibroids_ or
_fibro-myomas_. They present on section a fasciculated appearance, which
may resemble that of a section of balls of cotton (Fig. 54). They are
encapsulated and vascular, frequently attain a large size, and may be
single or multiple. While they may occasion neither inconvenience nor
suffering, they frequently give rise to profuse haemorrhage from the
uterus, and may cause serious symptoms by pressing injuriously on the
ureters or the intestine, or by complicating pregnancy and parturition.

The #Rhabdomyoma# is an extremely rare form of tumour, met with in the
kidney, uterus, and testicle. It contains striped muscle fibres, and is
supposed to originate from a residue of muscular tissue which has become
sequestrated during development.

[Illustration: FIG. 54.--Fibro-myoma of Uterus.

(Anatomical Museum, University of Edinburgh.)]

#Glioma.#--A glioma is a tumour composed of neuroglia. It is met with
exclusively in the central nervous system, retina, and optic nerve. It
is a slowly growing, soft, ill-defined tumour, which displaces the
adjacent nerve centres and nerve tracts, and is liable to become the
seat of haemorrhage and thus to give rise to pressure symptoms resembling
apoplexy. The glioma of the retina tends to grow into the vitreous
humour and to perforate the globe. It is usually of the nature of a
glio-sarcoma and is highly malignant.

#Endotheliomas# take origin from the endothelium of lymph vessels and
blood vessels, and serous cavities. They show great variation in type,
partly because of the number of different kinds of endothelium from
which they are derived, and partly because the new connective tissue
which is formed is liable to undergo transformation into other tissues.
They may be soft or hard, solid or cystic, diffuse or circumscribed;
they grow very slowly, and are almost always innocent, although
recurrence has been occasionally observed. Cases of multiple
endotheliomata of the skin have recently been described by Wise.
